Hello, colleagues! My name is Natalia Volodina. I am the Director of the Silvana Fashion Group's Holdings.
Today we will talk about competences. We will define this concept.
We will also talk about what a corporate model of competences is
and when it is appropriate to develop individual competences profiles for the positions that exist in our organizations.
We will talk about the stages of developing a competences model in the company,
how to plan this project and form a project team,
how to design a competences model and develop the development levels of each of the competences,
how to form an individual competences profile for the positions.
After that, we will talk a little about how to implement a competences model
so that the model we develop does not become a ballast that is owned only by the staff.
It does not work, is not used by the line managers and employees of our companies.
Therefore, we talk about how to best use the competences model
when evaluating, when holding evaluation events,
when forming development plans, personnel reserves, and so on.
At the end, we will say a few words about why competences models do not always work
and what needs to be done to make our model viable.
If you ask a question about what competences is,
I suggest that each of you answer this question for yourself, what exactly do you understand.
Most often, they answer that it is some kind of knowledge or skills,
that it is skills, and so on.
In fact, there are a lot of definitions,
and each consultant and staff management specialist strives to give their own definition.
But if we look at the slides you see,
where a number of definitions of this term, given by various authors, are given,
in each of them we will see the word behavior,
behavioral indicators, or behavior model, and so on.
Behavior is a key word in this definition.
I will give the following example.
Our employee knows, can, and drives a car well, but he does not.
Can we talk about the presence of competences?
Of course we can.
There is competence, but it is not demonstrated.
There is no work behavior that can be interesting to the company.
If this employee, for example, is an accountant,
it is not his main duty to drive a car.
So we close our eyes to this,
and by and large we do not require him to demonstrate such behavior in a working situation.
But if this is a driver, then the question arises whether we need him.
The fact is that we, as employers, acquire employees,
let's say, we acquire their competences.
We are interested in the behavior that they demonstrate in work,
the business behavior that leads to the achievement of those results,
those goals that lie ahead.
Another example.
For example, we have a chief engineer who is a very strict leader.
For example, employees from his department may even be a little bit tired of his style of leadership.
If we talk about whether he knows, can he manage people,
he can tell us, I have been doing this for 30 years, what else can I teach?
And maybe he really knows the principles of modern management, but he does not.
Therefore, once again, competence is, first of all, knowledge, skills, skills,
some personal qualities, perhaps, motivational statements that are expressed through behavior.
Personal qualities, again, do not sound easy to determine,
because there are such competences that we will call as undeveloped,
that it is very difficult to develop them,
and that, let's say, they depend mostly on what kind of person you really are.
But we will talk about all this in more detail a little further.
What is a competence model?
A competence model is a complete set of competence behavior indicators
that allow the employee to successfully perform his or her work functions.
The model, first of all, should be clear and easy to understand.
What is the understanding?
Employees.
Because it is the employees and the top managers
who have to work with the competence model.
This is their tool, and we, as a staff, create this tool together with them and for them as well.
The model should be described in simple language and have a simple structure.
If the model is complex, it is difficult to perceive, difficult to use.
Let's pay attention to the next slide.
Competence map, organization or corporate competence model.
What do we see?
Individual competence or individual profile of the position that we form
and which we will evaluate our employees.
What does it consist of?
How does it work?
First of all, there is a part of competence that we call corporate competence.
Corporate competence is a competence that can be applied to any position in the organization,
regardless of the hierarchy.
Whether it is the first person in the organization or a private employee.
Corporate competence is based on the company's values.
What is the company's answer to this question?
Are we like this?
Are we a team?
Or are we always focused on the result?
Or are we always client-oriented because we work in a service business?
The company's values can be either recorded in some corporate documents,
such as the strategy or the corporate ethics code.
Maybe not.
The company may be small in size and such documents do not exist.
Nevertheless, it is what is in the air.
Let's recall the situation when we were conducting an interview
and taking candidates for a certain position.
We noted that this is a professional person.
He knows and has the professional competences that we need.
But something is wrong with him.
He is not ours.
He will not survive in the department where we want to invite him.
Maybe he is very ambitious, he is focused on the result,
he is very active in achieving his goals.
At the same time, in this department, in our entire company,
corporate culture is characterized by such concepts as team spirit,
as cooperation.
It may turn out that this person will not be comfortable working with us.
Or vice versa.
We are active, ambitious, we always run forward, forward, forward.
And the candidate who comes demonstrates a different behavior.
He is a team player.
He may not survive with us.
We say that this is our intuition.
It seems to us so.
Now we can say that his behavior, his values do not correspond
to the corporate competences that exist in our company.
The number of such competences may be different,
but most often from 3, 4 to 6, 7.
No more.
Because the total number of competences in our model
can also be different.
But most often in the company practice,
it is somewhere from 8 to 12 competences that are really working.
It is important to remember the following.
The development of corporate competences is part of working with corporate culture.
When we understand and we want to materialize and explain in words,
formalize those values that exist,
in order to select employees based on these competences,
to stimulate these competences, to develop, to encourage this behavior.
So, let's go back to our slide,
the organization competences map.
We talked with you about corporate competences.
But the next type of competences is management competences.
Management competences are competences that are necessary for the leaders
to successfully achieve business goals.
Competences are developed for employees engaged in management activities.
And, what is important, for employees who have subordinates.
But the subordination can be both linear or direct, and also project.
What does it mean?
It means that if we have a task to select the project manager,
we will analyze not only his professional competences,
as a co-foundation in the area in which the project will take place,
but we will also evaluate his management competences,
how much he can manage the project and the project team.
Most often, according to the experience of colleagues,
management competences are standard in various areas.
And such components are included as vision or business management,
working with people and organization of activities.
In our practices, in our companies,
these competences can be called in different ways.
And we will talk about how to call a competency.
And the fact that I can call a company work with people,
you will call a work in a team.
Can it be the same?
Of course it can.
And we will talk about it further.
It is important to understand that, most often,
management competences are laid out in these three areas.
The next is professional competences.
Professional competences are competences that are applicable
to a certain group of positions.
Groups of positions.
It can be financial specialists,
it can be sales department specialists,
it can be personnel specialists.
Yes, again, we are talking about a group of positions.
Composition of professional competences is a very laborious
and long process that can take years.
I do not want to scare you, but there are not so many companies
in which professional competences are developed for all groups of positions.
Which group of positions do professional competences start to develop?
Most likely, it is the main group of positions.
The main key business group of positions.
If it is a trading company,
then the professional competences of the personnel service
will start to develop for the sales department specialists.
Because it is, let's say, an earning group.
If it is a production company,
then professional competences will start to develop
for the employees of the production unit.
Because it is these employees we pay more attention to.
These are our key employees.
And these key units are serviced by them.
Such as accounting, IT and personnel service.
And if it is an IT company,
then IT specialists will become the key group
and professional competences will be developed for them.
In some companies there are so-called collections
of single corporate requirements,
in which professional competences are prescribed.
And, in principle, this is a very good solution
when you have really reached the end.
And you have prepared it well in your company.
Let's go back to the slide
of the organization competence map.
We talked with you about corporate competences,
professional and management.
It is from them that individual competences are formed
or an individual profile of a position.
Let's see what we see on the slide
of the organization competence map.
On the left we see the hierarchical levels
of the organization on the Y axis.
That is, all positions,
starting from an ordinary employee or a performer,
ending with a top manager.
Let's look at the map and try to understand
what competences will be, for example,
in the training manager,
as one of the employees of the personnel management.
What competences will be his profile of a position?
Let's see.
The training manager is, most likely, a performer.
This is an employee who does not have other subordinates.
Thus, he will have a large set of professional competences.
A large set.
There will be everything related to his work.
About whether he knows how to do it,
how he does it, how he develops training,
how he conducts them,
how he evaluates their effectiveness, and so on.
How it is necessary to be successful in this position.
And also a set of corporate competences.
After some time, our training manager
grows to the head of the training department.
And what do we see?
Let's see.
We see that the corporate competences
remain the same set, in the same composition.
But now he needs a little less professional competences,
because a block of management competences has appeared.
He has now become a manager.
Now he has people in his behavior.
He needs to set tasks, control them.
He needs to manage his team.
Well, our training manager,
already the head of the training department,
is going up the career ladder.
Now he becomes the director of the training center
or the director of personnel development.
What do we see?
We see that the block of management competences
now dominates over the professional ones.
He is, first of all, a manager.
He may remember, and probably remembers,
and recalls the times when he conducted trainings
for various groups.
But now his main task is to plan training
and to form a training system in the organization.
Thus, his block of management competences is very large.
He has fewer professional ones.
And the corporate one is still in the same composition,
in the same amount, which was from the very beginning.
Thus, we can lay out on this map
the list of all our employees.
Once again, I would like to draw your attention
to the fact that corporate competences are the same for everyone.
Management competences are the same for all managers in the organization.
And professional competences change
depending on the group of positions.
And those professional competences,
which will be developed for the management of personnel,
will naturally differ from the professional competences
of the financial service,
logistics department, marketing department, and so on.
I suggest to do the following.
The distribution materials have two examples,
which describe the mission and values of two companies.
The first company is called Novacare.
It is a pharmaceutical company.
The next one is a metallurgical holding,
a large holding, which operates in our country.
I suggest to complete the following task.
Get acquainted with what these companies write about themselves.
What values do they declare,
when they address the external environment.
And try to formulate,
being an external expert in relation to these companies,
try to formulate the list of corporate competences,
which can be from your point of view in these companies.
What behavior is valuable in these companies?
Try to formulate it.
We have already mentioned competences several times.
Let's make a definition.
Competence profile or employee competence map.
Individual reference model of competences,
necessary for the success of a particular position.
The profile is useful for the following reasons.
The various positions and positions
imply a different level of competence development.
If we have defined one of our competences as a team work,
or team work,
then, depending on the position,
a different level of competence development is required.
If it is an ordinary employee,
then he must be able to be a team player.
He should not resist team work.
If it is a manager,
he should be able to be a team player or a team member.
He should be able to develop this team,
form it, combine it.
If it is a top manager,
he should be able to manage a group of teams,
because there will be several teams in the organization.
To remain relevant,
these profiles should be reviewed.
We will remember this when we talk about evaluation events.
The competence model is not something we have developed today
and will work with it for the next 10 years.
Not at all.
Whether it is a competence model or a more narrow competence profile,
it should be reviewed anyway.
The external environment changes,
the situation inside the company changes,
new goals are set.
It is important to understand what behavior is valuable today.
It is important to constantly review it
and at least agree that yes,
what we have determined,
the competencies we have determined for ourselves,
they still remain a priority for us.
The question is when to do it.
We will talk about it when we get to the evaluation procedures,
because the review and update of the competence profiles
is necessary to do before the evaluation
during the preparation events.
So, the development of the model is a long-term project and resource-intensive.
I mean not only money,
but also time and effort of all specialists involved in this process.
It is necessary to understand what our organization will get
except for a set of competencies
that will work or not.
Maybe not for ourselves, but for the higher management.
We will report what we have.
First of all, the company applies competencies
to achieve the compliance of the actions.
It is very important that already by accepting the employee
and conducting an interview when selecting candidates,
we begin to evaluate people
according to the competencies that exist.
It is easier to find a language for the employee,
the staff and the line manager.
Because the line manager does not say
that he did not like something,
that he did not feel something.
He says that everything is fine,
but he does not have these professional competencies.
Or their level of development is very low
and he will not fit into my team.
This coordination of actions allows the company
to be more mobile, more flexible.
And the use of competencies in all directions,
in all policies, procedures, services, staff
is a huge help.
The next important advantage is that
there is an opportunity to exchange information with employees.
When the employee becomes aware of the corporate norms and rules,
how it happens here, what we are,
if we talk about corporate competencies.
The employee also begins to receive feedback
about his activity.
When he receives a development plan,
where we write to him that everything is fine,
but these two competencies need to be improved.
The employee becomes aware of what we demand from him.
And he perceives the next evaluation event
as an opportunity to change the situation
for the better, perhaps for promotion.
And not as a kind of, let's say,
he perceives without fear.
He is not afraid that something will be unclear.
It is necessary to experience it.
And is it worth experiencing in this company?
Is it easier to simply change the company?
The next plus, the next benefit that the company gets
are the high standards of quality and efficiency
that you set when developing competencies.
After all, it is important to understand
when we talk about development levels,
what we consider the maximum,
how much we achieve this maximum,
what we consider the minimum.
Therefore, we constantly talk about this,
and we want it or not,
but we will most likely do it with you.
We will always set the highest standard
that is necessary,
especially when it comes to professional competencies.
In working with clients,
if they are employees of the sales department.
In training, if it is a training manager.
In organization and implementation of logistics works,
if it is the logistics department.
Colleagues, we talked with you about what competencies are,
what a competency model is,
what competencies are corporate, management, professional.
We said a few words about the competencies profile.
Now let's talk about what needs to be done
to have all this.
We are starting to talk about the development of a competency model.
First, it is important to remember
that there is no standard competency model.
Unfortunately, it does not exist.
What are the options we have in case
we have such a task?
The first option is to look somewhere, to someone,
to see what competencies are developed by someone.
From this list, choose what suits us.
The question is whether this method is better.
Of course, no.
But this does not mean that this method is not applicable in our practice.
It all depends on those goals, on that time,
on those time resources,
on the time restrictions that we have.
And we must understand that
we all come to competencies in different ways.
Someone does it this way because it is the optimal way in his conditions.
The next method is the development of a competency model,
which is called from A to I.
When in this project,
and this project is recognized in the company as quite serious,
it is not that the staff does something in the evenings,
maybe not in the evenings, but maybe at work,
maybe in the afternoon or after lunch,
goes to the managers,
and the managers no longer know that they come again, ask something, and so on.
It is important that this is a project that includes both staff and linear managers.
It is also important that the top management organization knows about this project
and there is support.
Because, once again, the project is quite resource-intensive,
and the strength and time of the employees are distracted by its implementation.
When the company understands that a competency model is necessary,
situations can be different.
I will tell you about my experience.
In 2003, the company I worked for began an active regional expansion.
In different cities of Russia,
located thousands of kilometers from each other,
we were looking for regional representatives,
that is, those people who can represent people,
represent the company, I'm sorry, in the region.
And we must understand that the level of development of regions was completely different.
And so it was not a single portrait of the person we were looking for.
It all depended on the level of development of the business in the company in the region,
and therefore people could be different in their competencies.
Working actively together with the head of the regional department,
we once again made up a profile,
we did not even call it a profile,
but a kind of application for the selection of a specialist.
And the head, perhaps a little bit of a joke, said,
listen, you know a man named Petrov,
and Petrov was one of the specialists who worked in one of the regions.
He worked for a long time, he was a star of such a regional scale.
He said, you know what, I said yes, I know him.
He said, I don't need this, I need Petrov, but two years ago.
What does it mean?
It means that, in other words, there were certain competencies,
which this employee had, let's say, their level of development was very high.
And, in principle, this was not required for the region where we were looking for now.
It's good if you still knew who Petrov was and how he ran the business,
and what we understand under this.
And if this is covered by the selection manager,
who has never seen Petrov before.
This suggests that there was a need, a need in a certain single language.
That this Petrov should be divided into various competencies,
and say which of his competencies are needed for a future employee.
Let's say, in Yekaterinburg, yes, which employee do we need in Novosibirsk,
which employee is needed in Khabarovsk, and so on and so forth.
This was a reason for the staff of our company to think about
where exactly that language is, and whether competencies can become them.
Let's say, there were not very many tools and sources at that time.
Then only one book on competencies was published in Russian.
Therefore, first of all, we analyzed the information that was on the Internet.
And on the Internet we found such very interesting information,
which was called a competency guide.
But here we decided that having received this guide,
we will quickly form our own, because we will take from there what we need,
or we will take even all the competencies, because this is a guide.
And we will work with them.
When we received this guide, there was a feeling of disappointment,
because it was just a list of competencies, good competencies,
but these competencies were not about us, because not everything somehow fit,
and it was not about the company, and not about Petrov.
And so it became clear that it was necessary to go your own way.
Someone has a long way, someone has a fast way,
someone has it easier, and someone has no time to do it for a long time.
In order to formulate exactly those standards of behavior that are valuable to us.
Thus, developing your own model of competence,
each company gets an advantage.
Once again, a language appears that is understandable to employees
and corresponds to corporate culture.
And the fact that each company plays by its own rules
is reflected in the model that the company creates.
When preparing a project for developing a model of competence,
it is important to remember the following.
First, you need to attract employees to the project who will use this model.
Involving colleagues, involving employees of different units in the project
does not mean that you should attract everyone at all stages.
But this means that involvement can be limited to informing people
about the goals and purposefulness of this project.
And also including a number of specialists from various departments in the working group.
So that people participate, people understand, they feel that they also created this.
That this is not just a product developed by the staff,
albeit very high quality, but nevertheless brought in from the outside.
After all, they are from their point of view,
which they need to use for some reason.
The next thing is to provide employees with complete information
about why and what is happening in the company.
Why is the model of competence created?
How will it be developed?
How will competencies be used in work?
Because it is the information of employees that prevents their possible resistance.
If I don't understand something, then I'm probably against it.
Because what else can you expect?
As an example, I will give a story from the experience of one colleague,
who works as a director of staff in the managing company of a large metallurgical holding.
Some time ago, their company acquired another plant,
which entered this holding.
And they decided that it was necessary to integrate the employees of this plant
into the corporate culture of the holding.
And they began to conduct research aimed at understanding
what are the corporate competencies of this event.
They invited consultants, began to interview managers, employees,
conduct interviews.
What did the employees who experienced stress of absorption of their enterprise to others, not to their relatives,
the first thing they encountered was an interview
and some actions taken against them.
They were absolutely unclear why this was necessary.
There was a rumor that based on such interviews, people will be fired,
and the rest of the people will be fired.
It is clear that rumors spread quickly,
and all this resulted in the fact that several people decided not to wait
until they will be interviewed, but simply to quit the company.
And it's good that in the staff service there was a person who asked himself the question,
why suddenly different people from different departments,
suddenly, after the unification of the company,
and not before, began to file a resignation letter.
And it turned out that, by and large, the lack of information of employees,
not paying attention to this,
could lead to the fact that the company would lose those specialists who were important to it.
The next principle that is important to understand when developing a model of competence
is that it is important that the standards of behavior included in the competence
suit all users,
and the assumed form of application corresponds to corporate value.
It is important that competencies should focus not only on what is valuable today,
but also should take into account what will be important for us tomorrow.
Because we must constantly focus on the future,
and not on the strategic goals that lie ahead of our companies.
I would like to draw your attention to the slide,
which shows the stages of development of the competence model.
Let's list them.
First of all, we plan the project, we prepare it.
We describe the desired result that we want to get,
we analyze the resources that are at our disposal.
After that, we create a project team.
We begin to understand who will be involved in the development of the competence model.
The third stage is the longest in terms of time,
the most difficult stage.
Because at this stage, information is collected and analyzed,
information about the behavior that exists in the company,
how people work today.
The result of this stage is a list of competencies.
At the fourth stage, we develop the levels of each of the competencies.
At the fifth stage, we form competence profiles for specific positions.
Let's go over everything in order.
So, the first stage is planning the project.
It would seem that at this stage everything is clear.
We need to do something, we begin to do it.
Most likely, we have some kind of time limit.
But the first question we should answer is
why does our company need a competence model?
What does it mean?
There are two approaches to developing a competence model.
The first one is when we solve a specific task that is in front of us.
For example, we need to form a personnel reserve,
select people and develop individual development plans.
Or we need to select a large number of people
and we need to meet the common requirements that we will propose.
This is the first case.
The second case is when we develop a competence model
knowing that it will become a core part of the personnel management system.
All the areas of the personnel service,
be it selection, assessment, training, and so on,
will be tied and integrated with each other.
Most often, they start with the first one and move on to the second one.
They start with a small piece, developing a competence model for a specific task,
and then they understand that they need to work on it
and understand which direction to move in
to get a single model for the whole organization.
Now we will talk about the second way
of developing a single model of corporate competences.
Nevertheless, each of you may face the fact
that you will need to develop, for example,
only management competences to form a reserve.
Or you will need to develop professional competences
for a specific group of positions.
You will start with this and in the future,
you will move on to get a single corporate competence model.
So, we have answered the question
of how our model will be used,
when it will be integrated,
and what policies and procedures it will be used for.
The next important point is management support.
How much are the top managers or management interested in the project?
How much do they understand that it is necessary?
Because, once again,
the distinction between resources will be from the current activity.
It is important to understand what we want to achieve.
This project must be sold to the top managers,
who will be involved and for whom we develop this tool.
The project will be successful only when the top managers
will start using this tool.
The next question we answer at the first stage is
how much time do we have?
It is great if we can answer this question ourselves
and we are not limited by any time.
Most often, time is limited.
From my experience, I can say that this project
cannot be done in a week.
Most likely, it is impossible,
if you do not close all the doors,
close yourself inside and do nothing
except developing competences.
Most often, it takes from one to three months.
Someone has a project that lasts six months.
Once again, the duration of the project
depends on the degree of involvement of the participants in its development.
How much time do we devote to this in a week?
How often do we conduct work groups with employees?
Do we have special people who work only within this project?
Or is it an additional load
of involvement in the project to the current activity?
A lot depends on this.
Therefore, it is necessary to plan and understand
what the duration of the project depends on.
The next step is to create a project group.
It is important to understand who will lead the project.
There is no right answer to this question.
In some organizations, it is a director of staff.
In some organizations, it is a general director.
On the one hand, it is strange,
because the general director's involvement
will be minimal.
On the other hand, in those companies
where the authority is very strong,
it is necessary to get it in an ally,
so that the employees understand
who is the guide of this project.
Most often, in large organizations,
it is someone from the staff, and not always HR director.
Next, it is necessary to understand
who else will be included in the project team.
The project team once again manages the project.
It is important not to confuse project groups with working groups.
Working groups are groups that are formed
to solve certain tasks at certain stages of the project.
If we collect information at the third stage,
we can form 5 working groups of various specialists
of various departments.
A member of the project team can lead a working group,
can be included in it.
At this stage, we must understand
who will enter the project team and lead the project,
who will work in the working groups,
who will perform the most difficult work
on the collection and analysis of information.
By the way, for those companies
where the staff is either small
or does not have the competencies
in the field of information collection and analysis,
for example, there are no sociologists or psychologists,
for various reasons,
I recommend at this stage to attract specialists from the outside,
namely to determine the implementation
of specific projects,
not for the entire project, but for specific tasks.
At the second stage of creating a project group,
it is necessary to determine who, when and how we will need.
Colleagues, now I propose to do the following.
Analyze the needs that your companies have.
If the topic of developing a model of competence
has interested you, then you need it.
Turn around, look and try to answer
the questions that are formulated
on the slides with the first and second stages.